Introductory, um, remarks.
Um, thank you for, um, coming in at late notice.
This will finish nicely, finish off our six monthly updates
for our banking inquiry.
Uh, and just to remind members
that we're being live streamed now in
public session. So welcome.
Cool. Thank you. Uh,
and I thought I would speak for something like 10
of the 15 minutes given.
I'm pretty sure no one except
for David here, knows who I am.
Mm-hmm. So, um, probably can fill in a bit of, bit
of context about why I'm here.
10 members of the committee.
Thank you for the opportunity to speak today.
My name is McGregor Fee
and I'm the managing partner of Alter Capital
and New Zealand headquartered venture capital
and private equity firm with over $350 million
in funds under management.
I'm here because I'm frustrated and I hope that you are too.
The problems with competition in New Zealand banking
and payments are well documented.
The solutions are well understood.
What is missing is parliamentary urgency.
And that's precisely why I am here in front of you today.
It is time that is the battleground for innovation.
Delay has been the weapon of choice
and your hands are currently on the murder weapon.
My perspective on the state of our banking
and payment system and regulations
is born from frontline experience
with digital banking in both the UK and New Zealand.
I have seen firsthand
how the UK's regulatory framework enables competition
and how New Zealand's actively prevents it.
Altered capital began as a spin out from a London based fund
that in 2015 was the seed investor in Starling Bank
today continues to represent interest totaling over 38%
of Starling, which now serves over 4 million
customers substantially.
Due to the support of the UK's world leading regulatory
framework, Starling's Reach is now international.
For example, here in New Zealand.
SBS recently announced that is going
to re-platform its core banking functionality
to Starling build software.
In addition to our interest in Starling in New Zealand,
we have also invested in emerge
our new digital banking challenger being built right here
at home in Al Tado.
Having been a board observer of starlink for five years,
and as a current director of emerge in New Zealand,
I'm not here today presenting hypotheticals.
Over the last two years I have led working groups
that brought together the FMA, the Reserve Bank MB
and the Commerce Commission.
The teams at every single one of those regulators,
institutions whose default instinct is to restrict growth
and maintain stability, have expressed their keen desire
and support for urgent action.
I believe that is extraordinary when regulators built
for caution are telling you to hurry up, you should listen.
But so far you have not done enough.
And I have watched as incredible advocates in the FMA
and the Commerce Commission have left their
posts out of frustration.
These are good people with good
intentions for New Zealanders.
They got sick of more studies, they got sick of more delays
and they got sick of words without action
and now they're gone and the incumbents couldn't be happier.
So I want to leave you today with four things
that you can do right now.
One, fix payments NZ governance immediately.
We don't need to give the incumbents another chance
to self-regulate our national payments infrastructure.
It is embarrassing that New Zealand's payment system
is currently governed by the company's act.
Let's compare payments NZ to pay uk.
Ours is a rules moderator with high walls
and no material resources of its own.
Theirs is an independent funded,
centralized infrastructure provider
with a board expressly mandated to represent consumers
and champion innovation.
The UK started solving this from 1999
and the result has been transformational competition.
The Commerce Commission recommended in 2024
that the Interbank Payment Network be designated under the
Retail Payment Systems Act.
That designation would empower the commission to one,
set standards, two implement rules,
and three, enforce compliance
under the current conditions.
You have sent them into a sword fight with a pool noodle
designation requires no new legislation.
Just acknowledgement
that corporates act in their own self-interest,
not the interests of New Zealanders.
You must do your duty
and protect Kiwis from this obvious conflict of interest.
You must designate the Interbank Payment Network under the
Retail Payment Systems Act two.
Adopt fit for purpose licensing before it's too late.
New Zealand has no specialist licensing
framework for banking.
In my view, this is the single greatest structural barrier
to competition in this sector.
Until we solve this, banking challenges rely on the support
of the very banks they're looking to disrupt
when investing in the in innovation.
A slow yes is far worse than a fast
no in banking.
The incumbents know that
and it underpins their anti-competitive strategy.
When Starling Bank launched in the uk,
it was granted a specialist banking life license
with a minimum capital requirement of a million pounds
and a fast tracked approval process.
The committee's plan
to reduce the requirement here in New Zealand in three years
time is far too slow.
What are we waiting for?
The current approach means
that most investors can't get off the starting line
to back New Zealand built competition.
The Prime Minister said in his 2025 State
of the nation speech that increasing capital investment
and critical sectors like banking
and FinTech was a primary objective.
If we instead have a system that prioritizes access
to organizations from Australia to Lithuania,
seemingly anywhere but New Zealand,
that capital investment will never arrive.
This is a solved problem.
You must not allow the proposed delay you must allow
for specialist digital banks.
Three, take action on fraud.
Fraud prevention in New Zealand is being
actively undermined.
Confirmation of payee is a long awaited service
but suffers the exact conflict of interest issues
as payments New Zealand due
to having the same shareholder controllers.
The recently enacted customer
and product data act requires free API sharing
for open banking enablement.
The same approach should be applied
to confirmation of payee.
At its core, confirmation
of payee is technically rudimentary,
but currently emerge is the only non-bank with access.
The committee must also also prioritize entities ingrained
in the domestic ecosystem.
Large scale E-money platforms operate with lower costs
and accountability than domestic competitors
and offer open access
to global crypto platforms whilst being largely outside
of the reach of New Zealand's Fraud controls
four allow customers to fight back through repurposed fines.
In the last five years alone,
New Zealand banks have paid over $20 million in fines
for doing the wrong thing by New Zealanders.
Meanwhile, domestic competitors face substantial
establishment costs as table stakes
to play in this high consequence game.
The UK addressed this directly
by establishing a competition fund for Fintechs.
Starling itself received 100 million
pounds under that scheme.
That scale is unlikely to get support here in New Zealand.
However, there is a costless solution available.
The committee should fight back on behalf
of New Zealand consumers who have been ripped off
by redirecting the fines already
and paid by the incumbents to domestic banking competitors.
There should be a consequence for bad behavior
and a benefit to New Zealand consumers,
members of the committee.
In summary, we are past the point
of carefully worded requests
and check-ins on self-regulation.
Parliament has the power
to set hard deadlines and consequences.
If you're serious about competition, you need
to be serious about consequences and timelines.
Parliament cannot continue to defer, delay
and deflect while the incumbents enjoy the regulatory
capture they have maintained
for 27 years longer than the uk.
I urge this committee to take responsibility
and to act with the urgency this situation
demands now me. Okay,
I will. Thank you very much
from, um, altered Capital.
Have we got any questions? Uh, Dr. Wilson?
No, No questions from me. It's perfectly clear. Mm-hmm.
Very clear. Any comments? Uh, just,
Just to say thanks for coming.
Just to be clear, I think you should be, um,
just make sure you understand
what this committee can and can't do.
Um, so again,
this is a hearing following up on the banking inquiry
and obviously, uh yeah, no, thanks for your advocacy,
but just to be clear, there's some of those things we don't,
we, we just can't decide them and they happen.
We can obviously make recommendations, which is great.
Just wonder, I mean, and again, I don't be following,
I mean I've been following up on the payments New Zealand
issue 'cause I I may not solve it in the way you are
suggesting, but I do have the same governance
and concerns that you do.
Mm-hmm. Um, and so yeah.
Um, I will be continuing to follow up that line
of questioning 'cause they're moving
too slowly in my opinion. Mm-hmm.
Yes. Yeah. And I very much support Dr. Small in
his advocacy in that regard.
Yeah. And, um, I feel sorry for his lack of teeth
that he currently has available.
Yeah. Dan Bidwell.
Yeah, just, um, to echo, uh, from Todd, just welcome.
Thank you for your submission
and um, I think we're all frustrated with how long
progress takes to improve competition.
Um, so the purpose is certainly to apply as much pressure to
the likes of Reserve Bank, um, the FMA ComCom to make sure
that they're doing everything they can
as quickly as possible.
Um, I know that it, things take time,
but just want to say thank you for
Yep. Thank you.
Uh, thank you Chair.
Thank you so much for coming and for that submission.
Um, I'm just checking in terms
of the submission one part you talk about take
action on fraud.
Mm. Um, I'm curious to know, do you have any numbers
or projections on what would've been the cost
of not addressing the issue when it comes to fraud?
Um, uh, not that I would say out loud on this forum.
Um, so the specific references that I was, um, uh,
leaning towards were confirmation of pay,
which is now established within the banks under a, um,
an entity called Get Verified,
which is also owned by the banks.
Um, that means that they can control access
and pricing into that.
So, uh, people outside that has been a massive, um,
step forward mm-hmm.
In fraud prevention in New Zealand,
but access is still limited.
So emergency only non-bank within that, um, framework.
Um, and in addition, uh, there are international players
who allow for, um, some circumvention of, um,
uh, of uh, uh, fraud prevention measures through
the ability to transfer payments into international markets
and cryptocurrency markets.
Yeah. So that's the specific point I'm looking to make.
There have been studies done on fraud,
um, and the loss there.
Um, uh, minister Simpson has obviously been an advocate of,
um, the total loss of fraud,
but, um, my comments are more
with the specifics of how it's enabled.
Yeah. Cool. Okay, Dr.
Thank you. Um, and that in part answered,
um, part of my question.
So the purpose of this round
of hearings is really our six month check-in mm-hmm.
On the banking inquiry.
So I just really want to hear your reflections on
what has kind of worked out of that.
Yes. Has the open banking stuff accelerated any
of the innovation that we're wanting to see there?
Or are there things that the committee needs to know
that have stalled Yes. Or weren't done?
Um, so the specific two things that, um,
are particularly frustrating that I was talking
to there are payments NZ governance speed
and ability to actually enact that.
Yeah. And the acknowledgement of the barrier to entry
that licensing, um, hurdles, uh, uh, uh, putting on,
um, challenges and the timeframe under which we're currently
being communicated that the reduction in capital requirement
will be coming in, being years away, not imminently.
So has that issue around sort of the non-ending banks, um,
has that had any in the six months, uh,
with this is our kind of health checks six months in, has,
have we seen the progress you'd want to see in that space?
No. So I think it's, it's clear
that the capital requirement is going to be reduced.
Yeah. Um,
but what I'm saying is the communication is end of 2028.
We're at the start of 2026. Yeah. Yeah.
So, um, that is, um, uh,
essentially terminal to capital formation.
Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Um, that, so that's the point there.
Um, there have been some wins. Okay.
Um, so, um, like CDPR initiative Yeah.
And the, um, zero cost APIs mm-hmm.
Is a really positive one for open banking
and the establishment of confirmation
of payee in the first place Yeah.
Is a really strong anti-fraud prevention measure. Mm-hmm.
So that needs to be extended, um,
and, you know, fraud in a, a broader sense looked at,
but those have been wins from the committee, um, for sure.
Yep. Okay. Thank you Mr.
McGregor for coming in for Malted Capital.
Thank you very much. Uh, we, we are in the process
of writing a report on our six monthly, um, update sessions
and we'll make sure that your
presentation is part of that for sure.
Awesome. Thanks. Okay. Thank you. Thank you.
Thank you very much. Okay. I.